{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;\f1\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red22\green23\blue26;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;\csgray\c100000;\cssrgb\c11373\c12157\c13333;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\csgray\c100000;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww18020\viewh14580\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri0\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Introduction
\b0  (new section at start)\
This report describes the process and results of a data science project to predict increases or decreases in electricity generation at fossil power plants in Texas. It begins with data collection and processing, and shows how the data are combined. The data fall into two general groups: 1) average operating characteristics of power plants over the course of a year, and 2) the state of the ERCOT grid at a given point in time (
\i t
\i0 ) and the hour directly preceding 
\i t
\i0 . We use the first set of data to group power plants into clusters, and the second set of data to predict the behavior of each cluster.\
\

\b Additional text about scoring and number of clusters
\b0 \
The number of possible clusters can range from k=1 to k=n, where n is the number of power plants operating. The point of clustering power plants is to improve our ability to predict how a group of similar power plants will increase or decrease their generation in response to changes in grid conditions. This will be especially important when using the model to predict the behavior of power plants that have not yet been built. Reducing k improves our ability to predict changes in generation, but it reduces the usefulness of the model. When k=1, we can conclude (unhelpfully) that power plants will respond to meet changes in load. Ideally, we want to find a value of k that is small enough to improve predictions but large enough to differentiate power plants into helpful groups. Future work that focuses on predicting emissions from changes in generation might use a more specific loss function related to error or uncertainty in those predictions. \
\
In all of the cluster plots below, there is always one cluster that looks like it should have two independent regression lines (cluster 0 with k=6). This behavior is consistent even with k=10. Future work should be done to determine if these are separate plants, or plants that operate under two different modes. Either way, we expect that predictions of behavior for this group may suffer if our model doesn\'92t include the features that lead to this behavior. \
\

\b Calculating hourly generation change
\b0 \

\i Rename this section? Maybe \'93Merge data for model\'94?\

\i0 Now that we have imported/cleaned all of our data, put it on an hourly basis, selected an appropriate value of k for clustering power plants into groups, and labeled each plant, we can calculate the change in generation for each cluster. This historical change in generation will serve as the known y-vector for our model.\
\

\b Model training
\b0 \
- Ratio of prices: Because the coal and natural gas prices provided by EIA are nominal, they are not appropriate to use in modeling future scenarios. Rather than adjusting for inflation - which is also difficult to anticipate for the future - we divide the coal prices by the price of natural gas. This ratio of prices contains all the same information, but is invariant to inflationary effects.\
- One-hot encoding: The \'93cluster\'94 column contains a value from 0 to 5 for each row. These cluster values are transformed into boolean variables (0 or 1) through one-hot encoding.\
- Split into training\'85: We have 9 years (~79,000 hours) of data, representing 2009-2015. Of these 9 years, we use 5 for training (2007-2011), reserve 2 for validation (2012-2013), and 2 for final testing (2014-2015). Because most of the regression models perform better with scaled data, we also transform the data using the scikit-learn StandardScaler() function.\
\

\b Linear Regression (OLS)
\b0 \
We start by fitting our data to a linear model that minimizes ordinary least squares loss. There are no hyperparameters to test on this type of model. According to the scikit-learn documentation:\
\
\'93\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The.. [score] \'85is defined as (1 - u/v), where u is the regression sum of squares ((y_true - y_pred) ** 2).sum() and v is the residual sum of squares ((y_true - y_true.mean()) ** 2).sum(). Best possible score is 1.0 and it can be negative (because the model can be arbitrarily worse). A constant model that always predicts the expected value of y, disregarding the input features, would get a R^2 score of 0.0.\'94\
\
After fitting a model, it is helpful to plot the predicted residuals against the predicted values. The residuals should be randomly distributed around 0, with equal error in both directions. In this plot we see that the quality of the predictions varies by cluster. Cluster 4 is especially skewed, which is not surprising given the behavior seen in the plot of generation change vs load change in the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "#Clustering"}}{\fldrslt Clustering}} section. Some of the residual errors shown in this plot are large compared to the predicted values - they range from +/-1,000 MW change in generation over a single hour, when the predicted values are almost entirely in the range of +/-400 MW.\
\
The validation score of 0.27 for this model and the scale of the residual errors are not particularly impressive.\
\

\b LinearSVR
\b0 \cf0 \cb4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
This is a linear support vector regressor, which scales to large datasets better than a SVM with a radial basis function kernel. It still employs a regularization parameter (C), which we can vary using GridSearch. From the validation curve plot below, it is apparent that the model performs poorly with small values of C (large regularization). This makes sense, because with large regularization the model will always predict the average value of y. And an average prediction of y will result in a score of 0.\
\
The learning curve plot shows that, at least for the LinearSVR model, we get the best possible performance once 40-50% of the data is included in the model. The model does not improve beyond this point, plateauing at a score of ~0.18.\
\
\

\b Gradient Boosting
\b0 \
Since none of the previous methods were able to able to predict the change in cluster generation with much accuracy, we move on to boosted gradient regression. The code below uses the XGBoost library, which is not included in the Anaconda python distribution. The results can be matched reasonably well with GradientBoostingRegressor from scikit-learn. We use XGBoost here because it is much faster and allows us to include validation and learning curves.\
\
Description of each column used in X:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li770\fi-360\ri0\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \cf0 \'a5	
\f0 nameplate_capacity: The total generating capacity of the cluster, calculated using data from EIA-860\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 GROSS LOAD (MW): The gross amount of generation for a cluster in an hour, calculated from EPA data\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 ERCOT Load, MW: The total load demanded by ERCOT in an hour, direct from ERCOT data\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 Total Wind Installed, MW: The total installed wind capacity, direct from ERCOT data\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 Total Wind Output, MW: The total wind output in an hour, direct from ERCOT data\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 Net Load Change (MW): The net change in ERCOT load demanded from the previous hour, calculated using the change in ERCOT load and change in wind output\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 NG Price ($/mcf): The monthly price of natural gas to power plants in Texas as reported by EIA\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 All coal: The quarterly price of all coal shipments ($/short ton) to power plants in Texas as reported by EIA\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 Lignite: The quarterly price of lignite coal shipments ($/short ton) to power plants in Texas as reported by EIA\
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1 \'a5	
\f0 Subbituminous: The quarterly price of subbituminous coal shipments ($/short ton) to power plants in Texas as reported by EIA}